If you have ever noticed Entity Framework Core eating up massive amounts of memory or grinding to a halt when you use .Include() to load related data, you have likely run into the exact problem split queries were built to solve.

To understand when to use .AsSplitQuery(), you first have to understand the "Cartesian Explosion" problem it fixes.

The Problem: The Cartesian Explosion

By default, when you use .Include() to load related data, EF Core tries to be efficient by fetching everything in a single SQL query using LEFT JOINs.

If you load a Blog, and include its Posts, and also include its Tags, the database returns a flattened grid of data.

If a Blog has 10 Posts and 10 Tags, the database doesn't return 20 rows. It multiplies them. It returns 100 rows (1 Blog × 10 Posts × 10 Tags).

The data for the Blog (like its title and author) is duplicated 100 times over the network.

If you are including multiple large collections, millions of redundant data points are sent over the wire, causing massive network lag and memory crashes when EF Core tries to untangle it.

The Solution: .AsSplitQuery()

When you append .AsSplitQuery() to your LINQ statement, you instruct EF Core to stop using giant JOINs. Instead, it generates a separate SQL query for each collection.

var blogs = await context.Blogs
    .Include(b => b.Posts)
    .Include(b => b.Tags)
    .AsSplitQuery() // Tells EF Core to fire 3 separate queries
    .ToListAsync();


    Instead of returning 100 duplicated rows, it executes:

One query for the Blogs (returns 1 row).

One query for the Posts (returns 10 rows).

One query for the Tags (returns 10 rows).

EF Core then stitches them together in memory. You just transferred 21 rows over the network instead of 100.

When to Use Split Queries

You should explicitly use .AsSplitQuery() when:

You are Include()-ing multiple collections (1-to-Many or Many-to-Many): As a rule of thumb, if you are including two or more collections on a single entity, you should strongly consider a split query to avoid the Cartesian multiplier.

The parent entity has very large columns: If your main Blog entity has a massive string column (like a 5MB base64 image or a huge text payload), a single JOIN query will duplicate that 5MB payload for every single Post it returns. Split queries prevent this.

Paging with collections: When you use .Skip() and .Take() alongside multiple .Include() collections, single queries can sometimes result in incorrect pagination results or severely unoptimized SQL.

When NOT to Use Split Queries (The Trade-offs)

Split queries are not a magic bullet. You should stick to the default single query when:

You are only including 1-to-1 relationships: If a User has one Profile, a JOIN does not duplicate any rows. A split query here would just add unnecessary network latency by making two trips to the database instead of one.

Network latency is your biggest bottleneck: If your database is hosted far away from your web server, making 3 or 4 separate trips to the database (even if they are smaller payloads) might take longer than just making 1 big trip.

You need strict point-in-time consistency: Because split queries execute multiple SQL commands sequentially, another user could theoretically update or delete a related record in the milliseconds between your first query finishing and your second query starting. (You can mitigate this by wrapping the call in a Transaction or using Snapshot isolation).

